Hello friends
In this video we are going to discuss about the binary number system.
We know that for a base N number system, we will have N numbers from 0 to N-1
And the numbers of that system will be a combination of these 0 to N-1 numbers
So the binary number system is the Base 2 number system.
Hence it will have the numerals from 0 to 2-1
that is 0 to 1
So that's just the two numbers 0 and 1
And for us humans we use the decimal number system
We express numbers in positional decimal format
But the computer can't store decimal numbers directly
The computer can understand only binary number system
which is also called as the base 2 number system
So the computer automatically converts the decimal number to binary format before using it
Whatever be the data
The computer always converts it into its only known language
which is binary
So learning binary number system and its conversion will be very helpful in programming
So if we have a number in decimal system
how can we convert it into its binary format?
Let us understand it using an example
so we have the decimal number 22
To convert this into its binary, we have to divide the number by 2.
It is because, the base of the binary number system is 2.
Similarly if you need to convert a decimal number to it's octal number
We have to divide it by it's base 8
and to convert a decimal number to it's hexa decimal number,
We have to divide it by it's base 16
so that is the first step in decimal to binary conversion
Divide the number by two and write down the remainder of the division
So here 22 by 2 is equal to 11
and remainder is equal to zero
again divide the result 11 by 2
and we get the result five and remainder is equal to 1
so note it down
and this procedure should be continued until we get zero as the result
So here the result is five
So divide five by two and we get 2 as the result
and remainder equal to one
again divide two by two and we get one
and remainder equal to zero
So divide one divided by two and we get the result zero
and remainder equal to one
So now the result equal to zero and we can stop
And to get the binary value of this number
just write the remainders of the operation in the reverse order
that is from bottom to up
So we get 10110
So this is how we can get the binary value of any decimal number
Let us revise the procedure.
Divide the number by two and note the remainder.
again divide the result of division by two and note the remainder
And continue this until we get the result as zero
And finally write the remainders in the reverse order
And that will be the binary value of that number
Now we have to by heart
the binary values of the numbers in decimal number system
and it will help us in many cases
So the 4 bit binary value of 0 is 0000
and the binary value of 1 is 0001
The binary value of 2 is 0010
the binary value of 3 is 0011
and the binary value of 4 is 0100
The binary value of 5 is 0101
the binary value of 6 is 0110
The binary value of 7 is 0111
The binary value of 8 is 1000
And finally the binary value of 9 is 1001
So we learnt how to convert decimal number to binary
If we have a decimal number we can easily convert it into its binary form
And what if we have a binary value and we have to convert it
into its corresponding decimal value
How can we do that?
We know that a binary number will be a string of zeros and ones
see an example
We have a binary value 10110
We have an easy method to convert this into its decimal value
And for that first we need to count the positions
and we count the positions from right to left
So the position of 0 is zero,
1 is one, next 1 is two
And next 0 is three and final 1 is four
Now that we have got the positions,
multiply these values  with two raised to position number and find the sum
that is 1 x 2 raised to its position 4
+ 0 x 2 raised to its position 3
+ 1 x 2 raised to its position 2
+ 1 x 2 raised to its position 1
+ 0 x 2 raised to its position 0
which is 16 + 0 + 4 + 2 + 0
That is 22
So this is the decimal equivalent of binary 10110
So  what we did is take each value and multiply with 2 raised to its position
and find the sum and we will get the decimal value
So today we discussed about the binary number system or
the base 2 number system which is the computer language
and we discussed about decimal to binary and binary to decimal conversion
So that's all
And in the next video we will discuss about the octal number system
So that's all for this video and thank you for watching.